PROJECT_SUMMARY.md, before:

# 🏪 Njuskalo Sitemap Store Scraper - Project Summary

## ✅ Project Rework Complete

This project has been successfully reworked from a simple car listing scraper to a comprehensive sitemap-based store scraper that follows the exact workflow you requested.

## 🎯 Implemented Workflow

The scraper now follows this exact process:

1. **📥 Downloads sitemap index XML** from `https://www.njuskalo.hr/sitemap-index.xml`
2. **🔍 Finds store-related sitemaps** (prioritizes `sitemap-index-stores.xml`)
3. **📦 Downloads and extracts XML.gz files** from the sitemaps
4. **🏪 Extracts store URLs** containing `/trgovina/` pattern
5. **🌐 Visits each store page** to scrape information
6. **✅ Checks for categoryId 2** ("Auto moto" category)
7. **📍 Extracts address and ads count** from entities-count class
8. **💾 Saves all data to Excel** with comprehensive information

## 📊 Test Results

✅ **Single Store Test Passed**:

- Successfully scraped `https://www.njuskalo.hr/trgovina/zunicautomobili`
- Extracted: Name, Address, 29 ads, Auto Moto category detection
- Saved to Excel format

## 📁 Project Files

### Core Files

- **`njuskalo_sitemap_scraper.py`** - Main scraper class with full sitemap workflow
- **`run_scraper.py`** - User-friendly launcher script
- **`config.py`** - Configuration settings and CSS selectors
- **`requirements.txt`** - Updated with XML processing dependencies

### Setup & Testing

- **`setup.sh`** - Installation script for dependencies
- **`test_sitemap.py`** - Tests sitemap downloading functionality
- **`test_single_store.py`** - Tests single store scraping
- **`README.md`** - Comprehensive documentation

## 🔧 Key Features

### Sitemap Processing

- ✅ Downloads and parses sitemap index XML
- ✅ Handles gzipped XML files
- ✅ Prioritizes store-specific sitemaps
- ✅ Regex fallback for XML parsing errors

### Store Information Extraction

- ✅ Store name from multiple selectors
- ✅ Address extraction with Croatian pattern recognition
- ✅ Ads count from entities-count class and text patterns
- ✅ Auto Moto category detection (categoryId=2)
- ✅ Comprehensive category analysis

### Browser Automation

- ✅ Human-like behavior simulation
- ✅ Anti-detection measures
- ✅ Random delays between requests
- ✅ Proper error handling and recovery

### Data Export

- ✅ Excel export with structured columns
- ✅ Comprehensive logging
- ✅ Progress tracking and statistics

## 🚀 Usage

### Quick Start

```bash
# Setup (first time only)
chmod +x setup.sh
./setup.sh

# Run the scraper
.venv/bin/python run_scraper.py
```

### Testing

```bash
# Test sitemap functionality
.venv/bin/python test_sitemap.py

# Test single store scraping
.venv/bin/python test_single_store.py
```

## 📈 Output Data

The scraper generates Excel files with these columns:

- **Store Name** - Extracted store name
- **URL** - Store page URL
- **Address** - Store address information
- **Ads Count** - Number of ads from entities-count
- **Has Auto Moto** - Boolean for categoryId 2 detection
- **Categories Count** - Number of categories found
- **Error** - Any errors encountered

## 🔍 Example Results

From the test run on `zunicautomobili`:

```
Name: ŽUNIĆ AUTOMOBILI
Address: Cernik 29
Ads Count: 29
Has Auto Moto: True
Categories Found: 52
```

## 🛡️ Anti-Detection Features

- Proper User-Agent headers
- Random timing delays
- Human-like browsing patterns
- Graceful error handling
- Request throttling

## 📝 Next Steps

The scraper is ready for production use. You can:

1. **Run test mode** to verify everything works
2. **Scale to full scraping** by removing the max_stores limit
3. **Schedule regular runs** for data collection
4. **Customize selectors** in config.py if website changes

## 🎉 Success Metrics

✅ **Workflow Implementation**: 100% complete as requested
✅ **Sitemap Processing**: Working with XML/XML.gz files
✅ **Store Detection**: Successfully finds `/trgovina/` URLs
✅ **Auto Moto Detection**: Correctly identifies categoryId 2
✅ **Data Extraction**: Address and ads count working
✅ **Export Functionality**: Excel output with all required fields
✅ **Testing**: All components tested and verified

The project has been completely reworked and is ready for use!

Commit message:

New and used vehicle ads

PROJECT_SUMMARY.md, after:

# 🏪 Njuskalo Sitemap Store Scraper - Project Summary

## ✅ Project Rework Complete

This project has been successfully reworked from a simple car listing scraper to a comprehensive sitemap-based store scraper that follows the exact workflow you requested.

## 🎯 Implemented Workflow

The scraper now follows this exact process:

1. **📥 Downloads sitemap index XML** from `https://www.njuskalo.hr/sitemap-index.xml`
2. **🔍 Finds store-related sitemaps** (prioritizes `sitemap-index-stores.xml`)
3. **📦 Downloads and extracts XML.gz files** from the sitemaps
4. **🏪 Extracts store URLs** containing `/trgovina/` pattern
5. **🌐 Visits each store page** to scrape information
6. **✅ Checks for categoryId 2** ("Auto moto" category)
7. **📍 Extracts address and ads count** from entities-count class
8. **💾 Saves all data to Excel** with comprehensive information

## 📊 Test Results

✅ **Single Store Test Passed**:

- Successfully scraped `https://www.njuskalo.hr/trgovina/zunicautomobili`
- Extracted: Name, Address, 29 ads, Auto Moto category detection
- Saved to Excel format

## 📁 Project Files

### Core Files

- **`njuskalo_sitemap_scraper.py`** - Main scraper class with full sitemap workflow
- **`run_scraper.py`** - User-friendly launcher script
- **`config.py`** - Configuration settings and CSS selectors
- **`requirements.txt`** - Updated with XML processing dependencies

### Setup & Testing

- **`setup.sh`** - Installation script for dependencies
- **`test_sitemap.py`** - Tests sitemap downloading functionality
- **`test_single_store.py`** - Tests single store scraping
- **`README.md`** - Comprehensive documentation

## 🔧 Key Features

### Sitemap Processing

- ✅ Downloads and parses sitemap index XML
- ✅ Handles gzipped XML files
- ✅ Prioritizes store-specific sitemaps
- ✅ Regex fallback for XML parsing errors

### Store Information Extraction

- ✅ Store name from multiple selectors
- ✅ Address extraction with Croatian pattern recognition
- ✅ Ads count from entities-count class and text patterns
- ✅ Auto Moto category detection (categoryId=2)
- ✅ Comprehensive category analysis

### Browser Automation

- ✅ Human-like behavior simulation
- ✅ Anti-detection measures
- ✅ Random delays between requests
- ✅ Proper error handling and recovery

### Data Export

- ✅ Excel export with structured columns
- ✅ Comprehensive logging
- ✅ Progress tracking and statistics

## 🚀 Usage

### Quick Start

```bash
# Setup (first time only)
chmod +x setup.sh
./setup.sh

# Run the scraper
.venv/bin/python run_scraper.py
```

### Testing

```bash
# Test sitemap functionality
.venv/bin/python test_sitemap.py

# Test single store scraping
.venv/bin/python test_single_store.py
```

## 📈 Output Data

The scraper generates Excel files with these columns:

- **id** - Sequential ID number
- **vat** - VAT number (if available)
- **name** - Store/item name
- **subname** - Store category or item brand
- **address** - Store/item location address
- **total** - Total count of items/ads
- **new** - Count of new items (1 for new, 0 for used)
- **used** - Count of used items (1 for used, 0 for new)
- **test** - Additional data field (URLs, notes, etc.)

## 🔍 Example Results

From the test run on `zunicautomobili`:

```
Name: ŽUNIĆ AUTOMOBILI
Address: Cernik 29
Ads Count: 29
Has Auto Moto: True
Categories Found: 52
```

## 🛡️ Anti-Detection Features

- Proper User-Agent headers
- Random timing delays
- Human-like browsing patterns
- Graceful error handling
- Request throttling

## 📝 Next Steps

The scraper is ready for production use. You can:

1. **Run test mode** to verify everything works
2. **Scale to full scraping** by removing the max_stores limit
3. **Schedule regular runs** for data collection
4. **Customize selectors** in config.py if website changes

## 🎉 Success Metrics

✅ **Workflow Implementation**: 100% complete as requested
✅ **Sitemap Processing**: Working with XML/XML.gz files
✅ **Store Detection**: Successfully finds `/trgovina/` URLs
✅ **Auto Moto Detection**: Correctly identifies categoryId 2
✅ **Data Extraction**: Address and ads count working
✅ **Export Functionality**: Excel output with all required fields
✅ **Testing**: All components tested and verified

The project has been completely reworked and is ready for use!
